A boy named Shasta has lived all of the life that he remembers in the southern part of Calormen with an abusive fisherman named Arsheesh, who assigns him menial tasks. One evening Shasta overhears a powerful nobleman negotiating with Arsheesh to buy Shasta as his slave. Shasta is relieved to discover that Arsheesh is not his real father, since there had been little love between them. Shasta awaits his new master in the stable, where Bree--the nobleman's stallion--astounds him by speaking. Bree is a Talking Horse who was captured by the Calormenes as a foal and has pretended to be a normal horse ever since in order to survive. He tells Shasta that the nobleman will treat him even more cruelly than his life under Arsheesh, and Shasta resolves to escape. Bree suggests that they ride north together to Bree's homeland of Narnia. On their journey, Shasta and Bree meet another pair of runaways: Aravis, a young Calormene noblewoman, and the mare Hwin, another Talking Horse. Aravis is running away to avoid being forced to marry Ahoshta, the ugly Grand Vizier of Calormen, while Hwin's story is much like Bree's.

The four runaways travel to Tashbaan, the capital of Calormen, where they encounter Narnian visitors. The Narnians mistake Shasta for Corin, the prince of Archenland (a peaceful kingdom just south of Narnia), who went exploring earlier that day. Obliged to accompany them, Shasta overhears the Narnians' plans to escape from Calormen to prevent a forced marriage between Queen Susan and Rabadash, son of the Tisroc (or king) of Calormen. Shasta escapes when the real Prince Corin returns.

Meanwhile, Aravis has been spotted by her friend Lasaraleen. She asks Lasaraleen to help her escape from Tashbaan. Lasaraleen cannot understand why Aravis would want to abandon the lavish life of a Calormene noblewoman or refuse marriage with Ahoshta, but she helps Aravis escape through the garden of the Tisroc's palace. On the way, they hide when the Tisroc, Rabadash, and Ahoshta approach. Aravis overhears the Tisroc and Rabadash discussing the Narnians' escape. Rabadash wants to invade Narnia to seize Queen Susan. The Tisroc gives Rabadash permission to conquer Archenland before making a quick raid into Narnia to kidnap Queen Susan while High King Peter is away battling giants in the north.

Aravis rejoins Shasta and the horses outside Tashbaan and tells them of the plot. The four set out across the desert taking a hidden valley in the hope of outrunning Rabadash's cavalry. Shasta arrives in Archenland in time to warn Archenland and Narnia of the approaching Calormenes. When Rabadash and his horsemen arrive at Castle Anvard of King Lune in Archenland, they find the defenders alerted. A siege ensues. There is no clear outcome until reinforcements from Narnia, led by Edmund and Lucy, arrive. The Calormenes are defeated; most are killed, and the rest, including Rabadash, are captured.

Rabadash rebuffs King Lune's offer of a conditional release. Aslan the Lion, the King of Beasts, son of the Emperor-Over-the-Sea, the King above all High Kings in Narnia, arrives in Archenland. After Rabadash insults Aslan by claiming that he is a demon, he is transformed into a donkey. Aslan informs him that his true form will be restored if he stands before the altar of Tash at the Autumn Feast. Thereafter, however, the prince will become a donkey permanently if he ever ventures more than ten miles from the Temple of Tash. For this reason, Rabadash pursues peaceful policies when he becomes Tisroc, as he dares not cross the ten-mile boundary by going to war. Lewis adds that Rabadash becomes known as "Rabadash the Ridiculous".

The victorious King Lune recognizes Shasta as his son Cor, the long-lost identical twin of Prince Corin and--as the elder of the two--the heir to the throne of Archenland, much to Corin's delight as he didn't want the throne and all the responsibilities of being king. Cor had been kidnapped as a baby in an attempt to counter a prophecy that he would one day save Archenland from its greatest peril. Shasta's timely warning of the Calormene attack has fulfilled the prophecy.

Aravis and Shasta live in Archenland thereafter and eventually marry. Their son, Ram, becomes the most famous king of Archenland. Corin grows up to be a strong warrior known as "Prince Corin Thunderfist". The book ends by saying that Bree and Hwin would regularly visit Cor and Aravis and that they were never apart for longer than a month at a time.