Following his godfather Sirius Black's death, Harry is visited by Dumbledore, who escorts him to the home of the Weasleys. They take a detour to meet Horace Slughorn, whom Dumbledore wishes to return to Hogwarts school to teach Potions. Slughorn is reluctant but agrees after realising he will teach the famous Harry Potter.

At Hogwarts, Severus Snape is announced as the new Defence Against the Dark Arts instructor. Harry, who had neglected to buy Potions supplies, must borrow an old textbook to attend Slughorn's class. He finds an old, tattered book bearing the inscription 'The Half-Blood Prince.' Harry notices that the scribbled tips inside the book yield better results than the printed instruction and continues to use the book afterward. He rises to the top of the class, with Slughorn attributing his Potions skill to be a trait inherited from his mother Lily.

Meanwhile, Dumbledore educates Harry about the past of Tom Riddle, aka Voldemort, to prepare him for their foretold battle. He shows Harry memories of people who met Riddle, including one of Slughorn when he was a professor. The memory has been altered, and Dumbledore wants Harry to retrieve the real one from Slughorn. Harry begins attending meetings of the Slug Club, an informal group of Slughorn's favourite students. Hermione and Ginny are also invited, though Ron is excluded.

Hermione asks Ron to go to Slughorn's Christmas party with her, but he is still upset with her for her past with Viktor Krum. He makes out with Lavender Brown after a Quidditch match and starts going out with her instead. Harry attends the party with Luna Lovegood but eventually leaves when Draco Malfoy is found gatecrashing the event. Following the holidays, Ron is poisoned on his birthday after drinking mead originally meant as a gift for Dumbledore. He survives but is dumped by Lavender for spending more time with Hermione after the incident.

Harry finally uses the Luck Potion ('Felix Felicis') to extract the unaltered memory from Slughorn. It reveals that Tom Riddle created six Horcruxes to make himself immortal. Horcruxes, magical objects encasing one's soul, are an ancient form of dark magic. Dumbledore believes two have already been destroyed but that at least four remain. He lists them to Harry, then summons him one evening, claiming to have found another. Together they journey to a cave, where a Horcrux is found to be hidden under protective enchantments in the middle of a lake.

Dumbledore nearly dies retrieving the object, then returns with Harry to Hogwarts. Seeing the Dark Mark above the Astronomy Tower, the two ascend it. Hearing footsteps, Dumbledore puts a protective spell on Harry, who is forced to watch as Draco disarms Dumbledore silently. Draco claims responsibility for trying to kill Dumbledore, on Voldemort's orders, throughout the school year but cannot bring himself to do it now. Snape comes to the top of the tower and fires a Killing Curse at Dumbledore instead.

Released from Dumbledore's protection, Harry chases after Snape and tries to use a spell on him, which Snape easily deflects. Harry is knocked down, and Snape taunts Harry for using his spells against him. He reveals himself to be the Half-Blood Prince, then escapes with Draco. Dumbledore's body is found at the bottom of the Astronomy Tower. His funeral is held on Hogwarts grounds and is attended by members of all wizarding races. Harry discovers that the Horcrux they retrieved was a fake and vows to find and destroy the remaining ones. Ron and Hermione promise to help him.