In 19th-century Norway, Jesper Johansen is the lazy, spoiled, self-centered son of the Royal Postmaster General, who has enrolled Jesper into his postman training academy hoping that it will reform him. Jesper deliberately underperforms, forcing his father to finally send him to the distant, northern island town of Smeerensburg with the task of posting six-thousand letters within a year. If Jesper fails, he will be cut off from the family's fortune. Upon arrival, it is explained to Jesper by sarcastic ferryman Mogens, and bitter teacher-turned-fishmonger Alva, that the town's two familial clans--the Ellingboes and the Krums--comprise nearly all of Smeerensburg's populace and are perpetually conflicted, spending more time hating each other than writing letters.

While desperately searching for people to post letters, Jesper finds an isolated lumberman dwelling far outside the town. There, he discovers a reclusive woodsman named Klaus, who has a house filled with handmade toys. Terrified by Klaus' imposing appearance, Jesper flees and leaves behind a drawing he had found from one of Smeerensburg’s Krum children. Klaus forces Jesper to bring him to the house depicted in the drawing and then secretly deliver a toy to the boy inside, cheering him up.

Word of this event spreads to other children and they go to Jesper the next day, each believing they will receive a toy if they send Klaus a letter. Jesper capitalizes on the idea, and asks Klaus if he can donate his toys; Klaus agrees provided they operate at night and Jesper continues to deliver the toys in secret. The Krum boy's toy leads him to play with an Ellingboe girl, much to their clans’ outrage. Family elders Tammy Krum and Aksel Ellingboe each explain and show their clans' histories of hatred with each other, which have gone on for a long time, and find out it was Jesper and Klaus who delivered the Krum boy the toy. Soon, more children begin writing letters to Klaus. When Jesper tells them Klaus only gives toys to good children, and knows whenever any child misbehaves, the acts of kindness they perform gradually inspire the rest of the townsfolk to end their ancient dispute, and Alva to reopen her school to help the children learn to read and write so they can send letters.

Eventually, Jesper and Klaus begin running out of toys. With Jesper's deadline approaching, he tries persuading Klaus to make more toys in time for Christmas. Klaus initially refuses, but then works with Jesper to build a sled for a small girl named Márgu, who lives in an isolated settlement with her people. Klaus finally tells Jesper about his wife, Lydia, and explains he had made the toys to give to the future children the couple hoped to have, but they couldn't conceive and Lydia died from an illness. Klaus has slowly realized their work is spreading joy to the children and agrees to the Christmas plan, with Márgu and the rest of her people arriving to help. As the town and his relationship with Alva flourish, Jesper finds himself wanting to stay in Smeerensburg.

Meanwhile, Aksel Ellingboe and Tammy Krum form a temporary truce, wanting to stop Jesper and Klaus so that the families can resume their traditional feud. They themselves post enough letters to meet well over Jesper's target and let his father know he posted fourteen-thousand letters. Jesper’s father arrives on Christmas Eve to congratulate his son, inadvertently revealing to Jesper's friends the selfish motives behind his deeds. Just before they leave town, Jesper's father notices his son's remorse, and after a private talk, he allows Jesper to stay. Jesper then tries to stop the elders and their angry mob from destroying the Christmas toys but apparently fails. However, Alva had already been informed of the plot by the town's children, and so she and Klaus had replaced the toys with decoys. During the chase for the toys, Mr. Ellingboe's daughter and Mrs. Krum's son also fall in love.

Jesper is redeemed, and Smeerensburg becomes a happy town, with the family elders being forced to end the feud due to the marriage of their children. Jesper marries Alva and raises two children, and he and Klaus continue to deliver presents in Smeerensburg and beyond for eleven years. Then on the twelfth year, Klaus follows a wisp of wind up a sunny hill and disappears, saying he is joining his departed wife. But although he is gone, Klaus lives on in Christmas stories, and so every subsequent Christmas Eve, Jesper still waits for Klaus who returns every year to deliver toys across the world.